---
title: When the doctor stops smiling
date:
  created: 2025-03-02
  updated:  2025-03-02
draft: true
categories: 
    - personal
authors:
  - kim
comments: false
---

It was my first time getting a colonoscopy, like many of us at 33. I had to eat one week without fiber, and stop eating for one day, while taking Picoprep, a substance that will force your colon to be completely empty. I went to Lund, Sweden by bus to the clinic, which is just a 30 minute drive. As nervous as I was the week before, I felt pretty okay now, and mostly ready to eat again because it's tough to fast for an entire day! But it was doable, including the 'toilet party' experience. Many have said that the Picoprep was dicusting and the whole prep day is an ordeal, but I didn't experience as such. Moreover, I wasn't worried about the outcome, as we are just doing this as a precaution, as I completely trusted my doctor saying that my issues were due to hemmeroids. I was slightly nervous about the anestatic, since I've never been put down under before for any procedure in my life.

Once in the clinic, I was in the waiting room. I saw a woman in her late 60s and a younger woman who I assumed was her daughter. They speaking in an other language that I couldn't understand, but it sounded east-European to me. The woman was called was called into the colonoscopy room before me. After some minutes, the nurse stormed into the waiting room, asking  if the daughter could come with her. Apparently her mother doesn't speak both English and Swedish and they'd needed to explain something to her but she couldln't understand it. The daughter went with the nurse and then I was alone in the waiting room. At that point, I started to get quite nervous about my upcoming procedure.

After about 10 minutes after, my name was called by another nurse. Luckily she could speak well enough English for me to understand what I needed to do. I first had to undress, but I could keep my top on but had to wear very wide disposable underpants, which felt like the fabric of those small airplane pillows you have for intercontinatal flights. She left me alone and once I was ready being changed, I had a good look at the equipment that they'll use on me. This really long black tube and a couple of screens that showed the end of that. I started feeling even more nervous than before.

The nurse came back in with another nurse, and ask me to lay down on the side on this bed, which also had some more of that paper material like my pants. While she prepped my arm and already gave me a preshot of morphine, the doctor that will perform the colonscopy came in. A big smile on his face, introduced himself as dr. Jacobsson but I could call him Eric. 'Since I'll know all of your darkets secrets, we can be on a first name basis' he joked, and I immediately felt more at ease. Now the nurse prepared the proposol, which is the thing I dreaded the most, which will make me fall asleep (but just lightely). Once she injected it into my arm when I was laying on my side,m looking at the white liquied going through the tube into my arm, I felt a warm sensation, starting from that location, going up to my head. 

I started counting backwards from 10, not because they told me to, but just that I felt that was something I needed to do. I didn't make it to 7, as then the warm sensation reached my head, I was out. I only remembered waking up a little, seeing me still on the table, where I said very lightly: 'Hey, I'm awake...', and falling asleep because the nurse propabable gave me some more of the proposol right away. I didn't feel anything otherwise. I woke up again when they were wheeling me into another room, and it was a nice way of waking up. I didn't feel groggy at all. It's like waking up after a good night of sleep without having an alarm clock on. 

I rested for what seemed 15 minutes, but once I was ready, I got dressed in my regular clothes to go to their small cafeteria. I got myself a nice cup of tea, and a big fat cookie, since I was quit hungry. An older lady in her 70s was already sitting at the table and we have gotten an conversation. She told me that she had this colonoscopy after a regular tested stooltest came back with miniscule blood in it, but that she already had the result back that it was nothing to be worried about. I wasn't really busy with my potential result, since I was mostly dreaming of my first real meal in 2 days, but it put me a little in ease. 

One of the nurses who was in the colonoscopy room came in, to say that the doctor is ready to see me now for the result. She asked if my partner was here, which he wasn't as we finished earlier than expected. She was hesitant but she said: 'alright, come with me to see dr. Jacobsson'. Once I walked into his office, I joked: 'seem like you needed some more anastetic to get me down' refering to the fact that I woke up during the procedure, and chuckled a bit. I was expecting a smile from the otherwise humoristic doctor, but when I looked at his face this time, he looked at me, dead serious. 'Please sit down here miss'. That's when it hit me: something is wrong.

When we were both at the same level, he looked at me and said: 'We have found something'. And he took a schematic drawing of a body with intestints, took a ballpen and put a very big cross right on top of the rectum. 'There is a big lesion here, about 5 cms in size' he said. Then he drew 2 small crosses lower down the sigmoid part of the colon: 'We found 2 pollips here as well'. Then he turned to me, looking me int the eyes, and I lost it. I started crying heavily, and at that time it was difficult for me to listen what else he had the say. All I could remember was, that I'll be transferred to the official public hospital care, and that I'll need to go to my GP clinic to get a whole bunch of bloodtests asap. 

I got a couple of papers for all the information, he wished me good luck with the process and let me off. My partner was waiting in the waitingroom at the time, and once he saw me he immediately smiled, until he saw my puffy eyes of crying and I could see the shock on his face. I hugged him and he me, and I cried a bit more. He conforted me, and by the time we were in the car, I was crieded out, for now, and was just looking on my phone for the neares bloodtest clinic where I could take those bloodtest to get this whole thing started right away. A few weeks later they did confirm what dr, Jacobsson didn't utter at least once, I have rectal cancer.

This was 1.5 years ago, may 2023. I still remember this moment in almost clearest detail, like my brain made a snapshot of the entire moment. Getting a cancer diagnosis is one of the most traumatic things that someone can experience and nothing can prepare you for that. . I was young, a bit overweight but exercised moderately, and did drink alcohol but much less then I did when I was a student... I wasn't worried at all since colorectal cancer is supposed to be an old man's disease right? Little did I know that it's a desease that sees no gender, and is the fastes growing cancer to affect young people. Why? They still don't know for certain. Our food, alcohol, weight, it all has an effect but they haven't found the smoking gun like they had with smoking and lungcancer.

I managed to handle the radiation, treatment and the tumor manage to go away by just that so I don't require surgery... just yet. The tumor was 5 cms, donut sized, affected 8 lymphnodes, and might have spread to my uterus but not distant. I get scans and scopes every 3 months, and a ct scans every year, so far so good, but I couldn't be closer to a stage 4 diagnosis as I would have been, which only has a 15 % survival rate compared to the 70% and up survavl rate of the lower stages. In hindsight, it was almost rediculous how more nervous I was for the actual colonoscopy, which was absolustely not the 'ordeal' that some people claimed it aby. then the premise of an actual cancer diagnosis. Perhaps I knew that before, I wouldn't had delay it as I did because I had business trips as I did and felt I couldn't commit to the diet or didn't feel like it. They could have found it way earlier at an earlier stage than they found it now. 

Both me and also my previous doctor were absolutely convinced that there were other reasons for me to have blood in my stool, even given the irregular bowel-movements I had the 6 months before, simple because I was young. Since it is colorectal awareness month this march, I tell this story to openly, such that any of you who read this will take their symptoms seriously, get themselves checked and advocate themselves. Even doctors are not aware that early onset colorectal cancer is upcoming and early detection drastically improves prognosis. Too many young people get diagnosed with colorectactal cancer at a way too late stage. So if you have isssues yourself, like blood, mucus, diarrea or concetpation or weightloss, go to your doctor and make them aware of this trend as well. 